The Lord, we thank you.
Thank you for your word.
Thank you that you have made it available to us.
Thank you that you do not leave us to wander around this life aimless, that you have given your word so that we might know who you are and what you have called us to, and especially how you've saved us in Christ.
God, we ask that you would be with our
Our smallest disciples in the nursery, Lord, we pray that their faith would grow even in these ways that maybe are unnoticeable to us, but you are doing something in their hearts.
Be with them as they interact with our nursery workers.
Lord, we pray that you would strengthen them to have patience, that they would have care and have love.
And God, for our students downstairs, may it be a joy and a delight to meet with their classmates, to learn about you.
Grow in their hearts, a desire to know you, to love you, to serve you.
And God for us up here, we want to learn to live and love like Jesus as broken people saved by grace.
Help us to do that and work that through us as a result of the reading and the preaching of your word.
And pray these things in Jesus' name, amen.
Exodus 16.
The whole Israelite community set out from Elam and came to the desert of sin.
which is between Elam and Sinai on the 15th day of the second month after they had come out of Egypt.
In the desert the whole community grumbled against Moses and Aaron.
The Israelites said to them if we had only died by the Lord's hand in Egypt.
There we sat around pots of meat and ate all the food we wanted.
But you have brought us out into this desert to starve this entire assembly to death.
The Lord said to Moses, I'll rain down bread from heaven for you.
The people are to go out each day and gather enough for that day.
In this way, I will test them and see whether they will follow my instructions.
On the sixth day, they are to prepare what they bring in.
And that is to be twice as much as they gather on the other days.
So Moses and Aaron said to all the Israelites in the evening, you will know that it was the Lord who brought you out of Egypt.
And in the morning, you will see the glory of the Lord because he has heard your grumblings against him.
Who are we that you should grumble against us?
Moses also said, you will know that it was the Lord when he gives you meat to eat in the evening and all the bread you want in the morning because he has heard your grumbling against him.
Who are we?
You are not grumbly against us but against the Lord.
Then Moses told Aaron, say to the entire Israelite community,
come before the Lord, for He has heard your grumbling."
While Aaron was speaking to the whole Israelite community, they looked toward the desert, and there was the glory of the Lord appearing in the cloud.
The Lord said to Moses, I have heard the grumbling of the Israelites tell them, at twilight you will eat meat, and in the morning you will be filled with bread.
Then you will know that I am the Lord your God.
Well, that evening quail came, covered the camp, and in the morning there was a layer of dew around the camp.
When the dew was gone, thin flakes like frost on the ground appeared on the desert floor.
When the Israelites saw it, they said to each other, what is it?
For they did not know what it was.
Moses said to them, it is the bread the Lord has given you to eat.
This is what the Lord has commanded everyone is to gather as much as they need.
Take an omore for each person you have in your tent.
The Israelites did as they were told, some gathered much, some little.
And when they measured it by the Omer, the one who gathered much did not have too much.
The one who gathered little did not have too little.
Everyone had gathered just as much as they needed.
And then Moses said to them, no one is to keep any of it until morning.
However, some of them paid no attention to Moses.
They kept part of it until morning, but it was full of maggots and began to smell.
So Moses was angry with them.
Each morning, everyone gathered as much as they needed.
And when the sun grew hot, it melted away.
On the sixth day, they gathered twice as much, two homers for each person, and the leaders of the community came and reported this to Moses.
He said to them, this is what the Lord commanded.
Tomorrow is to be a day of Sabbath rest, a holy Sabbath to the Lord.
So bake what you want to bake, and boil what you want to boil, save whatever is left, and keep it until morning.
So they saved it until morning as Moses commanded.
And it did not stink, or get maggots in it.
Eat it today, Moses said, because today is a Sabbath to the Lord.
You will not find any of it on the ground today.
Six days you are to gather it, but on the seventh day, the Sabbath there will not be any.
Nevertheless, some of the people went out on the seventh day to gather it, but they found none.
Then the Lord said to Moses, how long will you refuse to keep my commands and my instructions?
Bear in mind that the Lord has given you the Sabbath.
That is why on the sixth day he gives you bread for two days.
Everyone is to stay where they are on the seventh day.
No one is to go out.
So the people rested on the seventh day.
Now the people of Israel called the bread manna.
It was white, like coriander seed and tasted like wafers made with honey.
Moses said, this is what the Lord has commanded.
Take an omer of manna and keep it for the generations to come.
So they can see the bread I gave you to eat in the wilderness when I brought you out of Egypt.
So Moses said to Aaron, take a jar and put an omer of manna in it.
Then place it before the Lord to be kept for the generations to come.
As the Lord commanded Moses, Aaron put the manna with the tablets of the covenant law so that it might be preserved.
The Israelites ate manna 40 years until they came to a land that was settled.
They ate manna until they reached the border of Canaan.
This is the word of the Lord, and we say, thanks be to God.
Now, who here likes tests?
Who here likes tests?
You remember taking tests?
If you're not in school, you probably remember taking tests in the feelings that it brings up.
You remember studying late night into the next day, maybe, to get ready for the test.
You remember the pressure that you felt on exam day, the anxiety as you were taking the test,
And then really the anxiety that builds until you get your score back to where you're either relieved or you're disappointed.
How about driving tests?
Driving tests.
You remember driving tests where you have your instructor, your stoic instructor sitting in the seat next to you with clipboard in hand ready to make comments on your ability to drive and to adhere to the laws of the land.
and you are sitting in the next seat over, you are rigid.
You have your hands firmly fixed on 10 and two.
Test, we don't really like to be tested, but it is a useful thing.
Well, God tests Israel in the wilderness.
We read that he tests them so that he might know if they will respond
to his instruction.
Oh, God has freed the Israelites from slavery in Egypt.
And now he wants to know that do these people, do they know me?
Will these people follow me?
Will these people trust me?
So God tests them.
And in Deuteronomy chapter eight as Moses, that gives kind of an interpretation of the wilderness journey.
He says that the Lord has caused you to hunger.
The Lord cause you to hunger in the wilderness so that he might know what is in your heart.
Will you trust him or not?
And so we see here that the Lord tests his people.
He brings them to this place of hunger.
So they will know, he will know what they are about, where they are at.
And this first test he says to them, I want you to go out and I want you to gather manna daily.
I don't want you.
to keep it until the morning.
I want you to pick it up every morning.
Don't keep it though.
Don't keep it overnight.
And what do they do?
They keep it overnight.
Why?
Why do they do this?
Because they do not trust in the Lord's provision.
The Lord tests them and what they see, what we see is that Israel does not fare very well in their tests.
They do not trust the Lord to provide.
They're hungry in the wilderness.
They're coming out of a place of Egypt where their food was probably rationed and monitored.
So it's not like they had full bellies, but now they wake up this morning and they see this.
This wafer-like substance, this wafer bread on the ground, sweet to the taste.
They eat and they have their fill.
It probably feels really good and they don't want to let this provision pass.
They don't want to let this go.
They don't trust that the Lord will continue to provide that the next morning they'll wake up
And although all of the resources are gone, they don't trust that it's going to be there again.
They fail to trust in the Lord's daily provision.
What in the Lord says, well, I'm going to give this to you.
Six days, six out of every seven days, I want you to go out and gather on the seventh day.
I don't want you to gather.
I want you to stay, stay inside.
You don't have to go out.
I'm gonna provide for you enough on the sixth, so away on the seventh, you can just kind of chill into rest.
I want you to rest.
What do they do?
Nevertheless,
Some of the people went out and gathered on the morning of the seventh day.
Why do they do this?
They're coming out of a place of slavery where they were servants to Pharaoh and to the most powerful empire in the known world.
And surely this God who has exhibited his might and his strength over Egypt, well surely he is a God like them.
where he wants them to be working consistently and constantly working seven days a week.
They don't trust that this God is a compassionate God, that this is a God who wants to grant them rest.
And so they go out and they gather, they find that it's not there.
They don't trust the Lord to provide, they don't trust the Lord to grant them rest.
Now as we talk about
testing as we look at testing through the lens of our own lives.
There are a couple of things that we need to say.
First, we need to admit, say it out loud, that God does test his people.
I know this is uncomfortable, it's uncomfortable for me.
Maybe it's uncomfortable for you that God does test his people.
We have evidence throughout Scripture that God tests his people.
So we have this passage, but just before this passage, we looked at Exodus 15.
We didn't talk about it last week, but God, he allows his people to grow thirsty.
He wants to test them to see if they will follow his instruction.
And we have in Genesis chapter 22, is that remember, Genesis 22?
Abraham?
Abraham, Genesis 22.1, God tests Abraham to see if he will give up his only, his one and only son Isaac, the son that he loves.
Judges chapter three, God allows Israel's enemies to remain kind of in the land that is surrounding them.
Why?
So that God can test whether or not the God's people will follow his instructions and his commands.
John chapter six, Jesus tests his disciples.
There is a crowd of thousands of people that are coming to see Jesus.
Jesus turns to his disciples specifically, Philip, and he says, where shall we get bread to feed all of these people?
Philip says, oh, we're not concerned with Philip.
But then the commentator, John, John says, Jesus said this to test him, because he already knew in his mind what he was going to do.
Yes, it is true that God does test his people.
But we have to put up some boundaries.
We have to put up some boundaries.
In the book of James, James says, when you go through times of temptation, when you go through times of trial, do not say that the Lord is tempting you.
Because God himself cannot be tempted and he does not tempt anybody.
Yes, God does lead us into times of testing.
He either ordains it himself or he permits it.
He permits it to happen, but God himself is not responsible for leading us to sin.
When we sin, James says, when we sin, this is our own doing.
This is a result of us following our own desires.
This is kind of what we see happening in the Garden of Eden when God has Adam and Eve there, and he says, hey, here's a beautiful forest, beautiful provision for you in this garden.
You can have any fruit from any tree in the garden except for that one.
Just don't eat that one.
The choice really is yours to make.
You can listen to me, the creator, or you can
do what you want to in your own heart.
And they end up listening to the created.
They listen to the creature, the one that they're supposed to be ruling over.
That really God gives them a choice.
This is a faith test to see if they will follow God, follow the way of life, or if they will follow the way that leads to death.
A choice.
When we are tested, we have choices that we make.
So that good question to ask is how are we doing in the tests?
How are we doing in the trials that we are facing in life?
Maybe the Lord has permitted a financial hardship for you right now, or maybe the Lord has permitted financial abundance.
And in this time, we are tested.
And we find that, oh, what do we do with these resources?
We want to hoard them either because we don't have enough, or we want to hoard them because we have too much, and we don't trust that the Lord will provide for us daily, kind of like the Israelites.
And instead of giving generously the being a stewards, a good stewards of our finances, we take it for ourselves.
Or maybe the Lord has permitted a time of sickness for you or for a loved one.
And this time of testing, you are turning your heart away from the Lord.
Your questioning is goodness to you.
Your questioning is love for you and his provision for you.
Living in our society, we're constantly confronted with these tests.
How do we use our time?
There's so many offerings to us, to our kids, the sports and activities.
How are we giving ourselves the necessary time to come away from these, to rest, to find refreshment, and to worship the Lord?
Are we allowing ourselves to come away so that we can love our neighbor as we're called, so that we can go to those who are lonely?
maybe failing to take this time away.
We are failing to give the Lord our worship, failing to trust that He will uphold all of our cares and concerns that He will do the necessary work while we withdraw and rest.
How are we doing in these times?
In these times where we have these choices to make, that we don't like to be
It's not comfortable.
We actually arrange our lives so that we will mitigate hardships.
But this is how God works.
God tests His people.
Now God doesn't test His people because He doesn't know what's in their heart already.
God knows everything about us, past, present and future.
God gives us tests or God ordains, permits tests to happen, however you want to say it.
so that we will know the content of our hearts, so that we will know where we're at with Him.
And the early, these are opportunities for us to grow.
Testing and going through trials become opportunities for us to mature in our faith.
It tells us where we're at, where our hearts are at with the Lord, and it gives us a chance to grow in our faith as we depend on Him.
Now, in 2014, Christy and I, we lived in Seattle at the time.
And I was on the campus of Seattle Pacific University.
I was studying in their library.
And in 2014, on this particular morning afternoon when I was studying in the library, there was a shooting on campus.
So there was somebody who came into the student center and opened fire on a group of people.
And so I'm sitting there in the library and some of the workers are coming around telling people that there's an active shooter on campus.
We don't know if this is a smaller campus.
We don't know where the shooter is.
But we need you to come and we're going to go into lockdown.
And so this is kind of a revelation of where is my, how do I respond in this?
I've never been in this situation before.
I've seen a lot of shows where these really brave and courageous people, they seek out maybe somebody that's trying to inflict harm and they try to wrestle them down.
Or maybe they seek out people that are maybe in harm's way or in exposed areas.
They put themselves in danger's way so that they can help other people out.
I've never been in this situation before.
My response was, I went into this dark conference room with the rest of everybody from the library.
They turned off the lights, they closed the doors, our hearts were racing fast, and we held our breath every time the door opened, because we didn't know what's gonna happen.
Test reveal.
Test reveal where our hearts are at.
I wouldn't have known how it would have responded had I not been in that situation.
Now Israel, God tests Israel.
So if they may know
their hearts, where their hearts are at, but also so that they will grow.
These are God's people.
He says, I want them to know that I am the Lord their God.
I am their God.
I am a God for them.
They are my people.
I want them to learn this.
So what does this time of testing reveal about the Lord?
Well, first it reveals that the Lord is all an all-powerful and intimate provider.
God is an all-powerful and intimate provider.
Now, we said that they don't trust Him.
They don't trust Him to daily provide.
Now, why doesn't God just heap like tons and tons of grain on these carts and send them with the Israelites?
Why doesn't God send just like cattle, just multitude of cattle to journey with the Israelites and say, hey,
Yeah, you guys are taking care of this, I'll ask you about five, 10 years, I gotta go off and I gotta do some other work, but you guys will be okay, you'll have enough food.
Once that God provides daily, daily He provides this manna.
Why?
To show them that He is there with them.
That step by step He is there, that through the hardship He will provide for them, that He is in control of all nature.
And that He's not just gonna provide, He is going to provide an abundance.
Israel learns that through this daily provision of manner, they can trust him.
They can trust him with their daily need.
Oh, he also learned that this God really does desire rest for them, that this is a God who is compassionate, that this is a God who cares not just about their physical well-being, but really their spiritual, their soul.
Now they're coming out of a place of slavery with a king who probably worked them seven days a week back breaking labor.
They work to stay alive.
They work to stay safe.
But now they're finding out that, no, this God really is serious.
He will give us what we need if we withdraw.
And if we rest, God will continue to uphold the universe.
God will provide for us body and soul.
He will give us what is needed.
It's not comfortable.
It's not something that the Israelites probably would choose for themselves, but God grows them.
God, well, we'd like to think that God grows them, that their hearts are changed in this time of testing as it reveals to them who He is.
Well, because this is how God continues to work in our lives.
God gives us tests.
God permits trials in our lives so that we might know Him, so that we might love Him.
so that we might grow into maturity as his people and find what we need in him.
Now, if you think about it, you're probably not gonna choose, make these decisions for yourself, right?
You're not gonna choose to go through trials.
If I was in control of my life, I feel like my job is to avoid trials and to avoid hardships, but then we're not going to grow.
Think about, does anybody lift weights?
Does anybody try to build muscle, right?
It works, right?
It works to build muscle if you go to the gym and just talk a lot to people.
It works if you go to the gym, if you read a book, if you read a book about lifting weights, yeah.
No, no, that's not how it works at all.
In order to build muscle, you have to stress the muscle, right?
You have to increase your weight.
You have to increase your repetitions.
What you're doing is you're actually breaking down your muscle.
You're creating microscopic tears in the muscle fiber in your body because God created us to be so amazing.
Your body actually rebuilds that muscle and makes it stronger.
Think about our faith life in this same way.
as we think about discipleship.
As we think about discipleship as a process or as a journey where we are wanting to grow in our trust of the Lord.
We are, as we continue on this journey, as we think about discipleship through stages.
And each stage we come to a deeper place of trust in the Lord, where we are more willing to give ourselves, more of ourselves to the Lord.
I think about it in this sense.
And this is where growth comes through.
There's a place.
There's a place in these stages.
It's called the wall.
Janet Hagberg and Robert Gulick wrote a book, The Critical Journey, where they talk about the discipleship journey.
It's called The Critical Journey, but the stages of discipleship.
And there is something that they call the wall, this place we come into, this place where our will comes face to face or head to head with God's will.
It's a time of crisis.
It's a season of challenge.
It's a time when we are led to where we have no more resources, where we cannot depend on ourselves any longer, or if we want to continue to grow in our faith and in our trust, we have to turn to the Lord.
We can't go around the wall.
We can't go over.
We can't dig under it.
We have to go through the hard, difficult place of it.
This is the wall.
But as you look back, as you make it through the wall, as you go through the difficulties that you realize that this is where you've experienced the most growth.
Think about the times in your life where you've seen the most maturing as you look back.
Probably not in the midst of it, you don't think, oh, I'm really getting mature here.
You probably think, oh, this is really hard.
It's the times when you were most probably put under stress and put under pressure.
Not the times you were the most comfortable.
I think about for myself when I was in undergrad back at Western Michigan University.
I would play soccer at five to six nights a week down the rec center.
This is what I love to do.
This was my life.
But because of an experience where I was sledding,
I was sledding in a place I was not supposed to be sledding.
I broke my collarbone.
And so I was out.
It was a very painful thing.
I was out for a couple months.
It was during these couple months where I wasn't able to play soccer, like I love doing.
The Lord kind of brought me into this place where He deepened.
He deepened my trust.
He deepened my faith.
And Him, He connected me with a local campus ministry, a body that I never would have gone to had I still been engaged in those rec league
likely soccer nights.
You talk to some of the senior members of our congregation, those who have been through it, through illness, through accident, through loss, through job insecurity, through political instability, through broken relationships, talk to them.
They will tell you that yes, it is hard.
No, it is not something that I would have chosen for myself, but yes, this is a place where God has used to grow me.
I can tell for certain that God has taken this situation, he has made it for my good, or I depend on him, where my faith is matured, and I trust him.
God is our God.
He has claimed us for his own.
He loves us as his children, and so he tests us to reveal where we're at with him, where our trust is at.
So he gives us opportunities to grow in our faith with him.
bringing this to a close by talking about that thing that we all fear when we talk about tests.
What if I fail?
What if I fail the test?
What if I don't get that mark that I was hoping for?
What if I don't get that grade?
What if I don't measure up?
What if in my individual life, or what if we as a church, as we journey into this new season, this new mission, this new vision, what happens if we fail?
We probably will.
There will probably be times when we do fail.
The Israelites, they journeyed hundreds and hundreds of years with God, and I don't know if they ever really truly came to a place of deep trust in the Lord.
There are gonna be times when we fail to respond in our faith the way that we want to.
We want to live a life of deep faith.
We want to honor the Lord through our perseverance, through turning to Him time and again.
But we are not straight A students when it comes to this faith life journey.
We go through hardship and we complain.
We go through hardship and we are impatient.
We go through hardship and we turn away from the Lord.
We go through hardship and we look to alternative places for comfort.
We go through hardship and we fail to follow the Lord's leading.
We fail to take action where God is calling us to go.
We are broken people.
We are broken people saved by grace on this journey of trying to learn and live like Jesus.
But thankfully,
Thankfully, we have a savior who himself has been tested.
We have a savior who has been through every trial and temptation as we have, and yet he did not sin, says the author of Hebrews chapter four.
But Jesus Christ, God, who is also one of us, he went through the worst test that any human being has ever had to go through, rejection by his friends.
separation from God, the intimacy of God, being mocked by the people, being beaten, and eventually hung up on a cross.
But Jesus Christ was so concerned he was so honed in on the Father's will that he continued with it.
He endured that pain and that punishment and that separation.
And what we find is that through the greatest test that has ever been given to any human, Jesus Christ withstood it.
Jesus Christ was obedient to the Father, and what he did was he took our sins, our failings, upon himself at the cross.
And now the greatest triumph, the greatest victory has occurred through this greatest testing.
Because now, as we walk through life and as we go through tests and as we fail, we know that God does not regard us in the same way that God, instead of looking at us, he looks to Jesus Christ.
The perfect score of Jesus has been given to us.
And now we can be sure.
We can be absolutely confident that as we go through life, as we go through these trials, we can be certain that God is with us, that this intimate, all-powerful God, He is right there journeying with us because He loves us as His children, because He cares for us.
He is not going to let us go.
He's going to give us exactly what we need when we need it.
We can trust this because Jesus Christ has given up his life for us and he has raised from the dead for our life.
God gives us tests, it's not comfortable.
God gives us tests so we might know what's inside of us.
So we might know that we can trust him and so that we might grow in this beautiful faith that he's given to us.
All of God's people said, amen.
All right, our response, Psalm 116, what shall I repay to the Lord for His goodness to me?
Think about your life.
Are you going through any trials, any tests right now?
And how are you responding?
Are you responding in bitterness, complaint?
Are you seeking sources of outside comfort?
Do you need to offer to the Lord God, strengthen my faith and help me to turn to you?
Are you struggling to trust the Lord for daily provision?
Are you taking for reserve more than you need?
Are you basing your security off of it?
Are you neglecting to take rest offered by the Lord?
Are you failing to trust in His provision, trust that He's going to uphold things while you step away and seek Him out in worship?
Or do you need to cast yourself upon Christ who has already passed every test for us?